# How can experimental writing help deconstruct the celebrated narratives of colonialism that define Portuguese national identity?

## Introduction

In Portugal, the violence of colonisation is not fully acknowledged but is instead highly glorified. Every child undergoes a socialisation process that fosters a strong national identity aligned with the colonial period, called *"Descobrimentos"* (meaning "Discoveries"). This is executed through a selective apparatus for the production and distribution of knowledge in schools, monuments, public spaces, language, and other tools, as well as at home. The consequences of the associated violence are always omitted, minimised, or relativised, shapeshifting into to the spread of christian faith, comercial trade towards globalisation, a glorification of "heroic" navigation deeds, or the “enrichment/civilisation” of other cultures. 

One of the mechanisms is the mandatory school reading and interpretation of [[Os Lusíadas]]. This very famous book is an epic poem written by [[Luís de Camões]] in the 16th century, that recounts an imagined version of the first journey to India by sea. The book is very strict - it contains 10 chapters, consisting of 8816 ten-syllable verses (mostly heroic deca-syllables: stressed on the 6th and 10th syllables) and 1102 eight-line stanzas (octaves). The rhymes used are alternating and paired. 

I intend to investigate how I can rewrite [[Os Lusíadas]], using experimental writing techniques together with texts, books, media, scripts, and other artifacts within Lusophony. I envision this project as long-term and I am using my graduation period at Willem de Kooning Academie to investigate and produce prototypes of what it can be while creating a solid understanding of why I am doing this, its context, meaning, relevance to this day, materiality, resources and methodologies of work. Later on, I would like to request funding and carry on with the work through continuous collaboration with others, as I look for an understanding on how to work rhizomatically.

I will begin by explaining how Portugal played a massive role in the transatlantic enslaved trade until the last century, how colonial violence has been omitted in the last decades and in which ways colonialism is still celebrated in Portuguese society, including the mandatory reading of  [[Os Lusíadas]] working as a beacon for national identity. Further on I will shortly dive in the concept of national identity and nation, in order to understand its relation to epic poems and its tumultuous case within Portugal. Lastly, I analyse experimental writing in this context, presenting the methodologies I am using for the re-writing of the original book and their potential to be rhizomatic, and explain how I intend to carry both transparency and opacity along the project.

## How are narratives of colonialism celebrated within Portuguese culture?

